[//]: <> (author: Benjamin White)
[//]: <> (type: 3pc)
[//]: <> (time: 80)

# A Visual Introduction to Python Classes

In the introduction to this lesson, we said that objects and object oriented programming give us a way to model real world things and processes. In Python, we use **classes** to define new kinds of custom objects. In this assignment, we'll explore that how you can use Python classes in object oriented programming to model real world stuff. 

Read through [this excellent slide deck](http://slides.com/jasonmyers/learnpython-classes) introducing Python classes. You're encouraged to code along and try out the examples on your own. This will give you practice with Python syntax for classes.

## Comprehension Check

1. Explain in your own words what a **class** is (not just in Python, but in general).
2. What is an **instance**?
3. What's the relationship between a class and an instance?
4. What's the syntax for defining a new class in Python?
5. What's the spelling convention for class names?
6. How do you **instantiate** (that is, make an instance of) a class?
7. How do you access the attributes and behaviors of a class instance (for instance, `my_instace = MyClass()`)?
8. What's a method?
9. What is the purpose of *self* in Python classes?
10. What is the purpose of the `__init__` method? Give an example of how you could use it.
11. How can you use parent classes and inheritance to avoid code duplication?
12. Can child classes override properties of their parents?
13. What is with the `object` in Python 2.7+ class definitions -- for instance `class Foo(object):`?


