[//]: <> (author: Benjamin White)
[//]: <> (type: code from scratch)
[//]: <> (time: 180)

# Model the Bicycle Industry

To close out this unit, you'll use your new knowledge of Python classes and object oriented programming to create a simplified model of the bicycle industry. To succeed in this assignment, you'll draw on nearly everything we've learned about so far in this course: variables, strings, numbers, lists, control flow, functions, and classes. 

This is the first project you'll create where there isn't a single correct answer. As you advance as a programmer, you'll start to understand software architecture decisions in terms of tradeoffs. There are numerous ways to implement, each with distinct advantages and disadvantages. Honing your ability to recognize and analyze these tradeoffs is a key skill that separates intermediate and advanced software developers from novices.

We would like you to think of your solution to this project not only as a chance to get more practice with Python syntax, but also as an opportunity to start thinking about software architecture decisions. You won't have a strong sense of this yet, but as you grapple with modeling our scenario, keep in mind the principles we covered in the third assignment: DRY (don't repeat yourself), keep public and private methods separate, and strive for *loosely coupled* code. 

Once you've completed this project, be sure to send your solution to your mentor and plan on discussing it at your next session. Your mentor will be able to give you feedback on how you've architected your solution.  

## The Scenario

For this project, we'll imagine that you've been hired by a business analyst to build a system that models the bicycle industry. You need to be able to model bicycles, which are comprised of different combinations of wheels and frames, bicycle manufactuers, which sell different bike models at different prices, bikeshops, which sell different bike models with an added margin on top, and customers, who have names and different budgets for bicycles.

## Requirements

Here's a detailed spec of what you'll need to model using what you know about object oriented programming in Python:

-  Wheels
    +  Have a weight
    +  Have a cost for the manufacturer to produce
    +  Have a model name
    +  You'll need to **create a total of three wheel types**
    +  Even though you'll create two bicycle manufacturers, assume that all manufacturers use the same three wheel types.

-  Frames
    +  Can be made of aluminunum, carbon, or steel
    +  Have a weight
    +  Have a cost for manufacturer to produce
    +  Even though you'll create two bicycle manufacturers, assume that all manufacturers use the same three frame types.

-  Bicycle Models
    +  Are (in our simplified world) comprised of two wheels of the same type and a frame. 
    +  Have a total weight equal to the sum of the weight of the frame and two wheels.
    +  Have a total cost to produce (for our purposes, that cost is the sum of the two wheels' and frame's cost to produce)
    +  Have a name
    +  Have a manufactuer

- Bicycle Manufacturers
    + Have a name
    + Produce three models of bikes each
    + Have a percentage over cost they sell bikes to bike shops at
    + You'll need to create two bicycle manufacturers

- Bike Shops
    + Get their inventory of bikes from manufacturers
    + Sell bicycle models with a flat percentage markup over price they pay to manufacturer
    + Have a name
    + Have an inventory
    + Can see how much profit they have made on markup from selling bikes.
    
- Customers
    + Have a name
    + Have a fund of money to buy a bike
    + Can buy and own a new bicycle
    



## Hints

@property

dependencies
