[//]: <> (author: Benjamin White)
[//]: <> (type: code from scratch)
[//]: <> (time: 90)

# Code From Scratch Project: Fizz Buzz

In this assignment, you’ll build a [FizzBuzz](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fizz_buzz) app from scratch. In the original game of Fizz Buzz, you count from 1 to a given number (let’s say 100). For each number if it’s not divisible by 3 or 5, you simply say the number. If it’s divisible by 3, instead of the number you say “fizz”. If it’s divisible by 5, you say “buzz”. And finally if it’s divisible by both 3 and 5, you say “fizz buzz”. So, counting from one to fifteen, you’d say: “One, two, fizz, four, buzz, fizz, seven, eight, fizz, buzz, eleven, fizz, thirteen, fourteen, fizz buzz”.

This is admittedly not a very useful program, but as it turns out it’s a great small project to do, for two reasons. First, it brings together all of the programming fundamentals we’ve learned so far. To complete this project, you’ll need to use loops, conditionals, and the modulo operator (we covered that one in the prework for this course, but if you need a refresher, look [here](http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Python_Programming/Operators#Modulo)). Second, and as a consequence of the first point, FizzBuzz is a popular problem that interviewees will be asked to solve in technical interviews. If your goal is to become a professional developer, you definitely should know how to code up FizzBuzz. According to some [commentators](http://blog.codinghorror.com/why-cant-programmers-program/), the ability to code up FizzBuzz will put you amongst the top half percent of programmers who actually know how to program!

The requirements for this app are as follows:

The program should print out each number from 1 to 100, replacing numbers divisible by both 3 and 5 with “fizz buzz”, those divisible by 3 with “fizz”, and those divisible by 5 with “buzz”.
You should use Github for this project, and when it’s done, publish it with Github pages.
Note: Because FizzBuzz is a common interview question, it’s easy enough to find ready made solutions with a quick Google search. You’re on the honor system here, and you should keep in mind that copying and pasting a solution won’t cause you to really master the skills that FizzBuzz requires. If you get asked to implement FizzBuzz in an interview, it’s safe to assume your interviewer would be nonplussed if your instinct was to turn to Google.
introduce app



raw_input()
sys.argv
