<!-- 
time: 60 minutes
type: task
author: Benjamin E White
name: Zero to Hello World: Setting Up Python
 -->
In this assignment, we'll walk you through getting Python 2.76, setuptools, pip, and virtualenv. Python 2.76 is the most recent stable version of Python 2 as of the time of writing (May 2014), and it's what we'll use in this course.

[setuptools](http://pythonhosted.org//setuptools/) is a library for packaging Python projects. We won't directly use this library at all in this course, but it is a requirement for pip, which we will make use of.

[pip](http://www.pip-installer.org/en/latest/) is a package manager that makes it easy to install and track Python packages.  When you want to install 3rd party libraries for a Python project, pip is the way to go.

[virtualenv](http://www.virtualenv.org/en/latest/virtualenv.html) is a tool for creating isolated Python environments and manage dependencies. For instance, if you were building a web app, you might have a virtual environment set up that has Python 2.76, Flask, and SQL Alchemy. Then you could have another project on the same computer that uses a virtual environment with Python 2.76, Django, and Pscyopg2. With virtualenv, it's easy to manage per-project dependencies like this.

In the remainder of this assignment, we're going to point you to the right set of instructions for installing these requirements, depending on if you're on a Mac or PC. We're also going to show you how to get set up on Nitrous.io, which is a cloud-based development environment we recommend for students who are unable to configure Python on their local computers, or who are otherwise interested in cloud-based development.

Once we've got our dev environment configured, we'll write a quick *Hello World* program to confirm that everything is working properly.

# Mac Users

Macs comes with Python preinstalled, but to make your life easier in the long term, you'll want to use Homebrew to install Python, then install the other requirements.  

Please follow [these instructions](http://docs.python-guide.org/en/latest/starting/install/osx/). 

# Windows users

Assuming you already have Powershell installed on your PC, the process for setting up your dev environment is pretty straightforward.

Please follow [these instructions](http://docs.python-guide.org/en/latest/starting/install/win/). Note that there are two points in these instructions where you will be asked to run scripts. In both cases, you should save these scripts somewhere on your computer (your Desktop would be fine). To run them, `cd` to the directory where the script is and run `python scriptname`. After you've run these scripts to install setuptools and pip, you can delete the files.

# Nitrous.io Instructions

The setup for Nitrous.io is the easiest of all. First, you'll need to [sign up for an account](https://www.nitrous.io/users). After that, you'll need to provision a Nitrous.io box. You should select the *Python/Django* option. Note that we will be using Python with Flask in this course, but this is still the configuration option you want for Nitrous.io. It will take a minute or two for your Nitrous.io box to be configured, but once it is, you should open the IDE for the box.  

At the left of the interface you'll find a file browser. At the top right, you'll find a file viewer, which allows you to see the contents of individual files, which you select in the file browser. Finally, at the bottom, you'll find a command line console. When you choose the Python/Django configuration for Nitrous.io, by default your box will be provisioned with Setuptools, pip, and virtualenv. 

Finally, note that if you're working on Nitrous.io, you'll be working with Python 2.73, not 2.76. This is because Nitrous comes pre-loaded with Python 2.73, and they don't have great support for 2.76 out of the box. Don't worry though, all of the code we use in this course will run fine in this environment.


# Hello World!

To confirm that our dev environment is correctly configured, we're going to finish of this assignment by writing a simple *Hello World* inspired program. This program will print "Hello world" to the command line, along with information about the version of Python we're running. Please follow these steps:

1. 	**Create a project folder:**  First we need to create a folder to house this mini-project. We'll create a folder called *hello_world*. If you're on a Mac or PC, we'll leave it up to you to decide where to put this project folder, but the Desktop is probably a good place. 

    If you're working on Nitrous.io, you'll need to log into your box, and then create a folder called *hello_world* inside of your workspace folder (`cd ~/workspace`). No matter which platform you're on, after you've created your project folder, `cd` into it, as we'll need to be inside the *hello_world* directory in the next step. 

2. 	**Create and Source a Virtual Environment:** Now we're going to create a virtual environment for this project. From the command line, inside your *hello_world* folder, run `virtualenv venv`. This will create a new virtual environment called "venv". "venv" here is just a convention -- you could just as easily call your virtual environment "steve". 

	It will take a few moments for the virtual environment to install. Once it does, you'll have a folder inside of *hello_world* called "venv" (or whatever you called your virtual environment). Now, you need to **source your virtual environment** (i.e., turn it on). If you're on a Mac or Nitrous.io, you should run `virtualenv venv/bin/activate`. If you're on a PC, run `venv/Scripts/activate`. You'll know your environment is activated when you see its name in parentheses to the left of the command prompt.

3. 	**Hello World +:** Now we're going to create a simple Hello World program to confirm that everythhing has installed as expected. In your text editor, create a new file called *hello_world.py* and save this file inside of the *hello_world* folder. Put the following code inside of *hello_world.py*: 

    ```python
    import sys

    print "Hello world!"
    python_version = sys.version
    print "This program is running: " + python_version
    print "That's all. Goodbye!"
    ```
    
    Save these changes. Now let's run our program. From the command line, navigate to the *hello_world* folder and run `python hello_world.py`. In addition to the greeting, you'll also see the version of Python that's running. If you're on a Mac or PC and have followed the instructions in this assignment, you'll see version 2.76 indicated. If you're on Nitrous.io, you'll see 2.73. 

4. 	**Deactivate Your Virtual Environment:** We're all done with this project, so let's deactivate our virtual environment. If you're on a Mac or Nitrous.io, just run `deactivate`. If you're on a PC, you'll need to run `venv/Scripts/deactivate.bat`. You'll know your virtual environment has been deactivated because it will no longer appear in parentheses to the left of the command prompt.

5. 	**Delete Your hello_world Folder:** It's probably safe to assume that this is a project that doesn't belong in your portfolio of work you show potential employers. Let's go ahead and delete this folder. From the command line, navigate to the parent folder of *hello_world* then run `rm -r hello_world`. 




