[//]: <> (time: 15)
[//]: <> (type: content)
[//]: <> (author: Benjamin E White)

#  Git Workflow Best Practices

To close out this lesson, we want to give you some general guidelines for your Git workflow when you're coding up projects moving forward. 

-  **Git status is your friend**: Get in the habit of running `git status` before you do any Git commands like adding, committing, merging, resetting, etc. Basically any time you run a command with side effects, precede it with `git status` and make sure that your understanding of the state of your repo is correct. This will prevent you from accidentally committing files or changes you don't mean to commit. Never end a programming session without running `git status` to ensure that your repo is clean; make sure you see the messages "Your branch is up-to-date with 'origin/master'" and "nothing to commit, working directory clean". 
-  **Commit When You've Achieved Something**: Git users often talk about the idea of "committing early and often". The idea is that you should incrementally add and commit changes to your repo as you make progress on a project. So how granular should your commits be? Should you be adding and commiting a file each time you entered a new letter? Of course not. But should you only add and commit your files only after you've coded up, for instance, a full-fledged, bug free complex web app? That wouldn't be good either. A good general rule is to add your files and commit them any time you've made enough progress that you can subscribe it in a succinct commit message. And when you save a commit locally, be sure to push up to Github.com so your work is backed up and accessible from any computer with access to the repo.
-  **Don't Expose Private Information Publicly**: If your Github repos are publicly viewable (e.g., free), make sure you're not saving any sensitive information.
-  **Use Feature Branches**: If you're working with an existing program or codebase, and you're going to add a new feature or bug fix, create a new branch, and make your changes on that branch. Be sure to push your new local branch up to Github by doing `git push -u origin <branch-name>`. When your feature is complete and you're ready to move it into production, first pull down master to ensure there aren't any updates there (if you're coding by yourself and you know there's no changes on master, this step is not neccessary), then merge master into your branch, and finally merge your branch into master.

These guidelines are minimal, and as you grow as a programmer, you'll undoubtedly add your own. If you'd like to read more about Git/Github best practices, [this](http://sethrobertson.github.io/GitBestPractices/) is a good starting point.
