<!-- 
author: Benjamin White
type: 3pc
time: 60 minutes
name: Practice Control Flow and Loops
 -->
You've heard a lot about control flow and loops, now it's time to get some practice. In this assignment you'll work through two sets of exercises from Codecademy. These will give you a chance to practice what you've learned about comparison operators (greater than, less than, etc.), logical operators (and, or, not), if/elif/else statements, and while and for loops. You'll also be introduced to some new Python language constructs: switch statements, while/else blocks, for/else blocks, enumerate(), and zip(). 

First work through [these exercises](http://www.codecademy.com/courses/python-beginner-BxUFN/0/1?curriculum_id=4f89dab3d788890003000096) on conditionals. After that, work through [these exercises](http://www.codecademy.com/courses/python-beginner-BxUFN/0/1?curriculum_id=4f89dab3d788890003000096) on loops.

###### In the second set of exercises on control flow, you'll encounter some functions, which we haven't discussed yet. The next lesson is entirely devoted to functions, so we're going to hold off on explaining much about them until we get there. The Codecademy exercises give you enough guidance to complete them without knowing much about functions. For now, all you need to know is that it is a block of code that you can refer to by name and execute by calling it. You'll see examples of how to define and use functions in the exercises.

# Comprehension Check

1. What is the purpose of a switch statement? What is the syntax?
2. What are infinite loops and why should they normally be avoided?
3. Give an example of a while/else block and explain how control would flow through the program.
4. How can you loop over and print all of the key/value pairs in a dictionary?
5. What is the purpose of the built in enumerate() method in Python? Give an example using a *for* loop.
