[//]: <> (author: Benjamin White)
[//]: <> (type: 3pc)
[//]: <> (time: 30)

# Learn about List Comprehensions
##### 30 minutes

You've learned all the basics about lists in Python at this point, but there's one really neat feature of Python that we haven't encountered yet: **list comprehensions**. A list comprehension is a way of building up a list out of an existing iterable (that is, something that can be iterated on or looped over).

Here's an example of a list comprehension that takes a list of strings and numbers and filters out the strings:

```python
first_list = [1, 'two', 3, 'four', 5]
second_list = [item for item in first_list if type(item) == int]
print second_list
```

If you run this code in your console, you'll see that second list contains 1, 3, and 5 from the first list. Note that our use of "item" here was not required. The comprehension could also have been written as `[i for i in ...]`. 

The list comprehension syntax above is a more compact way of implementing the following logic:

```python
first_list = [1, 'two', 3, 'four', 5]
second_list = []
for i in first_list:
    if type(i) == int:
        second_list.append(i)
```

As you can see, the list comprehension accomplishes in one line of code what would otherwise take four. Because of this, Python programmers frequently use list comprehensions (and refer to them as distinctively "Pythonic"). 

We encourage you to start using list comprehensions in your own programs as appropriate, but at the very least, you should be able to identify and understand list comprehensions when you see them in code.

Round out your knowledge of list comprehensions by reading through [this short tutorial](http://carlgroner.me/Python/2011/11/09/An-Introduction-to-List-Comprehensions-in-Python.html) on list comprehensions.

<note>In addition to list comprehensions, Python also supports dictionary comprehensions, in which you create a new dictionary out of one or more existing iterables. We won't cover dictionary comprehensions in this course, but you can easily find out about them by doing a Google search.</note>

## Comprehension Check

Make sure you can explain what a list comprehension is and give an example.
