[//]: <> (author: Benjamin White)
[//]: <> (type: code from scratch)
[//]: <> (time: 180)

# Code From Scratch Project: Fizz Buzz
##### 180 minutes

In this assignment, you’ll build a [FizzBuzz](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fizz_buzz) app from scratch. In the original game of Fizz Buzz, you count from 1 to a given number (let’s say 100). For each number if it’s not divisible by 3 or 5, you simply say the number. If it’s divisible by 3, instead of the number you say “fizz”. If it’s divisible by 5, you say “buzz”. And finally if it’s divisible by both 3 and 5, you say “fizz buzz”. So, counting from one to fifteen, you’d say: “One, two, fizz, four, buzz, fizz, seven, eight, fizz, buzz, eleven, fizz, thirteen, fourteen, fizz buzz”.

This is admittedly not a very useful program, but as it turns out it’s a great small project to do. It brings together all of the programming fundamentals we’ve learned so far. And it's also a popular problem that interviewees will be asked to solve in technical interviews. According to some [commentators](http://blog.codinghorror.com/why-cant-programmers-program/), the ability to code up FizzBuzz will put you amongst the top half percent of programmers who actually know how to program!

<note>Because FizzBuzz is a common interview question, it’s easy enough to find ready made solutions with a quick Google search. You’re on the honor system here, and you should keep in mind that copying and pasting a solution won’t help you master the skills that FizzBuzz requires.</note>

## Project Requirements

- **Output**: 
    -   First print "Fizz buzz counting up to *n*", substituting in the number we'll be counting up to.
    -   Then the program should print out each number from 1 to some value *n*, replacing numbers divisible by both 3 and 5 with “fizz buzz”, those divisible by only 3 with “fizz”, and those divisible by only 5 with “buzz”. Each number goes on a new line.

- **modulo**: You'll need to use the [% modulo operator](http://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Python_Programming/Operators#Modulo).

- **Two Versions** 
    + v1: Hard Coded Upper Limit
        +   Hard code in 100 as value for upper limit to count up to when the program runs. 
        +   Verify your program works by running it from the command line with `python my_script.py`, substituting in your Python file name. 
     
    + v2: User Supplied Inputs
        * If user supplies value at command line when script runs, we'll use that value.
        * Otherwise, we'll use the raw_input() dialogue to get an input from the user.
        
- **Version Control**
    + Get to v1, commit to master, and push to remote repo. 
    + For v2, branch from master onto a new feature branch. When you've completed v2, commit it in your feature branch, and push the branch up to the remote repo.

## Hints and Guidance

**v2 Command Line Inputs** We can use Python's the `argv` function from Python's built in [sys module](http://effbot.org/librarybook/sys.htm) to allow users to supply values when they run a script from the command line. To do this, we'll need to import the sys module into our script, and then write code that allows us to access user supplied inputs. The best way to see how sys.argv works is with a working example.

```python  
import sys
 
print "The name of this script is {}".format(sys.argv[0])
print "User supplied {} arguments at run time".format(len(sys.argv))

for arg in sys.argv[1:]:
  print arg
```

You can clone a Gist of this [here](https://gist.github.com/7b4ce0b62c8dfa0b5f5e) or else just copy the code above into your text editor and save it to a file called 'sysargv-example.py'. Once you've got the code, run it from the command line at least two times. The first time, do `python sysargv-example.py`. The second time run `python sysargv-example.py 1 3 cats`.

The first time we run this is to demonstrate that the first argument to sys.argv is always the name of the script that the user has supplied at the command line. When we run the program this time, it tells us the name of the script and that there were 0 additional user supplied arguments. 

The second time we run it, we see that the first through *n*th arguments get printed, each on a new line.

Use sys.argv in your v2 of FizzBuzz to *optionally* get user inputs from the command line like this. Note the emphasis on **optional**. The script should still run even if the user doesn't supply additional command line arguments. This means you'll have to use control flow to deal with two situations: one in which the user supplies command line arguments, and one where they do not, in which case we'll fall back on raw_input().

**v2 Raw Input:** If the user doesn't supply arguments when they call the script, you'll need to use `raw_input()` to get an input. You briefly encountered `raw_input()` earlier in this unit. All you really need to know about it is that it allows you to supply a message that prompts the user for an input, and then assign that input to variable. 

To see a demo, either[clone](https://gist.github.com/f3fe3acfe4e56a86a830) the code below or copy it into a file called 'raw_input.py'. Then from the command line run `python raw_input.py`. 

```python 
my_input = raw_input("Enter something, yo!")
print my_input 
```

As you can see, the value you supply to the raw input gets assigned to a variable. We in turn substitute that variable in to the string we print in the second line.

**Type Conversion:** Your v2 program will need to handle type conversion. The values you get from both raw_input() and sys.argv will be *strings*, and our Fizzbuzz program requires integers. You can convert string number characters into integers with the `int()` function -- for instance `print type(int('1'))` results in `<type 'int'>`. 


## Project Completion

When you finish this project, send a link to your repo to your mentor, and be sure to discuss and review your code at your next mentor session.


## Extra Challenge

In the previous assignment you learned about exception handling. Practice this skill by writing code that handles the situation when users supply non-numeric inputs to either sys.argv or raw_input(). You should figure out where this user behavior would raise an exception in your code, use a try/except block to catch it, and then respond by print a message to the user that they need to supply numeric inputs for the program, then follow that up by using raw_input() to ask for a new numeric value.

