[//]: <> (author: Benjamin White)
[//]: <> (type: code from scratch)
[//]: <> (time: 180)

# Model the Bicycle Industry
##### 180 minutes

To close out this unit, you'll use your budding knowledge of Python classes and object oriented programming to create a simplified model of the bicycle industry. To succeed at this assignment, you'll draw on nearly everything we've learned about so far in this course: variables, strings, numbers, lists, control flow, functions, and classes. 

This is the first project you'll create where there isn't a single correct answer. As you advance as a programmer, you'll start to understand software architecture decisions in terms of tradeoffs. There are numerous ways to implement, each with distinct advantages and disadvantages. Honing your ability to recognize and analyze these tradeoffs is a key skill that separates intermediate and advanced software developers from novices.

We would like you to think of your solution to this project not only as a chance to get more practice with Python syntax, but as an opportunity to start thinking about software architecture decisions. You won't have a strong sense of this yet, but as you grapple with modeling our scenario, keep in mind the principles we covered in the third assignment: DRY (don't repeat yourself), keep public and private methods separate, and strive for *loosely coupled* code. 

Once you've completed this project, be sure to send your solution to your mentor and plan on discussing it at your next session. Your mentor will be able to give you feedback on how you've architected your solution.  

## The Scenario

For this project, we'll imagine that you've been hired by a business analyst to build a system that models the bicycle industry. You need to be able to model bicycles, which are comprised of different combinations of wheels and frames, bicylce manufactuers, which sell different bike models at different prices, bikeshops, which sell different bike models with an added margin on top, and customers, who have names and different budgets for bicycles.

## Requirements

### Design Python classes for each of the following:

-  Wheels
    +  Have a weight
    +  Have a cost for manufacturer to produce
    +  Have a model name
    +  You'll need to **create a total of three wheel types**
    +  Even though you'll create two bicycle manufacturers, assume that all manufacturers use the same three wheel types.

-  Frames
    +  Can be made of aluminunum, carbon, or steel
    +  Have a weight
    +  Have a cost for manufacturer to produce
    +  Even though you'll create two bicycle manufacturers, assume that all manufacturers use the same three frame types.

-  Bicycle Models
    +  Comprised (in our simplified world) of two wheels of the same type and a frame. 
    +  Have a total weight equal to the sum of the weight of the frame and two wheels.
    +  Have a total cost to produce (for our purposes, that cost is the sum of the two wheels' and frame's cost to produce)
    +  Have a name
    +  Have a manufactuer

- Bicycle Manufacturers
    + Have a name
    + Produce three models of bikes each
    + Have a percentage over cost they sell bikes to bike shops at
    + You'll need to create two bicycle manufacturers

- Bike Shops
    + Get their inventory of bikes from manufacturers
    + Sell bicycle models with a margin over price they pay to manufacturer
    + Have a name
    + Have an inventory
    + Can see how much profit they have made on margin from selling bikes.
    
- Customers
    + Have a name
    + Have a fund of money to buy a bike
    + Can buy and own a new bicycle

All of the classes that you write should exist in a single file.


### Write a script that:

- Lives in a file separate from your models and imports them.
- Creates two bicycle manufacturers, which both produce three different bicycle models (note that this implicitly requires you to create the wheels and frames that both manufacturers will need to produce their bicycles)
- Creates one bicycle shop that has 6 different bicycle models in stock, 3 from each manufacturer. The bicycle shop should charge its customers 20% over its cost for buying the bikes from the manufacturers.
- Creates three customers. One customer has a budget of $200, the second $500, and the third $1000.
- Prints the name and total weight of each bicycle model carried by the bike shop
- Prints the name of each customer, and a list of the bikes offered by the bike shop that they can afford given their budget. Make sure you price the bikes in such a way that each customer can afford at least one.
- Prints the initial inventory of the bike shop for each bike it carries.
- Has each of the three customers purchase a bike then prints the name of the bike the customer purchased, the cost, and how much money they have left over in their bicycle fund.
- After each customer has purchased their bike, the script should print out the bicycle shop's remaining inventory for each bike, and how much profit they have made selling the three bikes.

## Good Luck!

We're going to leave you largely on your own to complete this assignment, and we expect that your solution will **not** be optimal because you're just starting to work with object oriented programming and it takes time to develop an instinctive sense of what makes for good object oriented design. As we said before, think of your solution to this project mainly as a conversation starter for you and your mentor.



