<!-- 
author: Benjamin White
type: content
time: 60 minutes
name: Command Line Refresh
 -->

To program in Python, you need to be able to do some basic things from the command line. There’s a ton of commands you can learn, but for the purposes of this course, you don’t need to be a pro. You do need know how to do things like creating, deleting, moving, and navigating between files and folders. In this assignment, we'll point you to some review materials to get you back up to speed on command line basics.  

# Steps

1.  **Fire up Your Command Line Utility:**  If you're on a Mac or Linux, you can use the preinstalled command line interface. If you're on Windows, you'll use Powershell.
2.  **Work through the Flatiron School Tutorial on the Command Line:** Our friends at Flatiron School created a [great introductory tutorial](https://gist.github.com/aviflombaum/9d6f7448119bae3a24ee) that covers command line basics. Work through this tutorial if you need a refresher; it won't take long!
3.  **Learn 2 More Commands:** In addition to the commands you learned in the Flatiron School tutorial, you need to know two more commands to get started: `mkdir` and `rm`. `mkdir` creates a new directory: try creating one using the command `mkdir name_of_directory`. When you do this, make sure you first `cd` into a "safe" directory where you won't delete any system files.
 
    `rm` is for deleting files and folders. If you want to delete a file, you have to supply the `-r` (for recursive) option with this command. Let's delete the directory we just created by running `rm -r fname_of_directory`. Remember that you can use tab after typing the first characters of the directory name to save time. 

    With these two additional commands, you’ve got the basic commands that we need to know. 

###### **Warning**: When you delete a file in the command line, you should consider it gone forever. That bears repeating: Deleting a file in command line is permanent! As in, it doesn’t go into the Trash bin, where you can recover it. Do yourself a favor and take this lesson to heart now before you mistakenly delete an important file forever, perhaps just before a looming development deadline!


# Comprehension Check

Make sure you know how to use the following commands:

*   pwd
*   cd
*   ls
*   touch
*   open
*   mkdir
*   rm

