[//]: <> (name: Object Relational Mappers)
[//]: <> (author: Iain Duncan)
[//]: <> (type: content)
[//]: <> (time: )

# Object Relational Mappers

Broadly speaking, the purpose of an ORM is to allow us to program more *naturally* in an object oriented language. When working with a relational database management system (RDBMS), our data is ultimately stored in tables, with individual elements stored as rows. Interconnected objects are difficult to represent this way, as the RDBMS has no inherent notion of a hierarchy or inheritance. Thus representing even a moderately complex object graph can require many joins across many tables. This is cumbersome in SQL, and for a complex database, even simple updates can require long and error prone SQL queries.

This problem is sometimes called the *Object Relation Impedance Mismatch*, which is basically just a fancy way of saying that it can be really difficult and convoluted to represent otherwise simple and intuitive Python objects in relational databases, and conversely, it can be challenging to represent complex relational database data in terms of simple Python objects. The purpose on an ORM is to solve this problem by allowing us to work with objects in our application code, leaving the generation and execution of the actual SQL to the ORM.

Using our pet database, let's say Iain is leaving the country and must give all his dogs to Ben. In SQL, we would need to issue some complex queries to 
manage our many-to-many relationship of pets to people.  With an ORM, we can use code that reads similarly to how we think about the problem. Programmers say that the code is *reflective of the problem domain*, we are working with objects that match real world objects in our **domain model**. This is preferable to working with the SQL, which is reflective of the *implementation*, tables and rows of simple data types. 

    # retreive Iain and Ben as objects, using their db IDs
    iain = session.query(Person).get(4)
    ben = session.query(Person).get(5)

    # iterate through Iain's pets
    for pet in iain.pets:
        # if the pet is a dog, give it to Ben
        if pet.breed.species.name == 'Dog':
            iain.pets.remove(pet)
            ben.pets.append(pet)

    # commit our transaction, this flushes ALL the SQL for all the above
    # in one fell swoop
    session.commit()        

This is a lot more readable than working directly with psycopg and SQL.
To update Ben's pets, we remove a pet from the list **iain.pets** and add it
**ben.pets**; the ORM takes care of sorting out the SQL. To find out if a pet is a dog, we check **iain.pets[ pet_index ].breed.species.name**. The required joins are all executed behind the scenes; this one variable represents the work of four joins! 

What's more, this *business logic* or *application logic* code is now *decoupled* from the database implementation. If our table names, column names, or table structures change, none of the code in this example would need to be changed. If we changed our table structure so that pets could only have one person, removing the many-to-many table and replacing it with a one-to-many relation, we would not need to change anything in the example, Ben's pets can still be accessed and mutated as a list at **ben.pets**, regardless of how this relationship is represented at the database layer. As you can imagine, this is a huge maintability benefit in complex projects.

A third less obvious benefit is that in combination with Python *properties*,
this gives us a very effective *boundary zone*.  Let's imagine we also want to add some business level rules, distinct from database level rules. We want to prevent certain kinds of updates, and we want to do so with logic that is too complex to express in our database structure. But, we want to add these constraints to an already running system, and preferably not have
to change any of our existing application code. 

Let's say that a person *must* always have a full 10 digits for their phone number, and it will always be stored as a 10 digit string without hyphens or spaces, but will (for now) be displayed consistently with hyphens. However, we don't want to change the fact that we are already reading or updating
a person's phone number using the **Person.phone** member variable, as we already have code doing this. This is an example of wanting to preserve the **public interface** to our domain model.

By telling SQLAlchemy that we will map a *private* Python property, **Person._phone**  to the 'phone' field in the 'person' table, we can
add code that executes when the *public* property **Person.phone** is accessed,
and have this code prevent a bad update and store only digits. 


    class Person(base):
        ... boilerplate ommitted here that will come later ...        
        
        # phone number accessing property, reading Person.phone will call this
        @property
        def phone(self):
            "return phone number formatted with hyphens"
            # get the phone number from the database, mapped to private self._phone
            num = self._phone
            # return a formatted version using hyphens
            return "%s-%s-%s" % (num[0:3], num[3:6], num[6:10])
    
        # phone number writing property, writing to public Person.phone calls this 
        @phone.setter 
        def phone(self, value):
            "store only numeric digits, raise exception on wrong number length"
            # strip out hyphens and spaces
            number = value.strip(' -')
            # check length, raise exception if bad
            if len(number) != 10:
                raise BadPhoneNumberException("Phone number not 10 digits long")
            else:
                # write the value to the property that automatically goes to DB
                self._phone = numbner


With the above definition of the Person class, we now can use the person object
very naturally, and other parts of our program that are *using* the Person.phone property do not need to be changed.

    # get some input values in a dict, will have a key 'phone' with some input
    input_dict = get_input_values_somehow()
    
    # write the value to our person
    # Person class takes care of storing only digits, and throwing exception
    # if the input is bad  
    try:
        ben.phone = input_dict['phone']
    except BadPhoneNumberException, e:
        log.error("Error: bad phone number for person %i. Exception: %s" % (
          ben.id, e)


Even more succintly, this allows us to use input dictionaries with keys
corresponding to property names on our objects so we can update many attributes
of an object in one loop.
    
    # get a dictionay of input values to use for an update 
    input_dict = get_input_values_somehow()
    # IE {'phone':'123-456-7890', 'email':'iain@iainduncan.com', 'first_name':'iain'}
    
    # get the person we want to update
    iain = session.query.get(4)
    
    # write all the values to our person, allowing the properties on the 
    # Person class to deal with any validation or conversion issues
    for key, value in input_dict.items():
        
        # if the person object has a property matching this key, update it
        if hasattr(iain, key):
            setattr(iain, key, value)    
    
    # commit, generating the SQL and running the transaction
    session.commit()
   

In the above example, we have accomplished a number of Very Good Things for 
larger projects

*   Our application code is readable and small; it is obvious what we are doing.
*   The way we deal with people is consistent, we always write and read the
same properties, no matter how we change the database or the validation & conversion methods.
*   Our validation & conversion code lives in a sensible place, on the Person
class, instead of sprinkled throughout our application in every place that we update people.
*   We can change any of our layers independently of each other: application logic, validation & conversion, and database persistence.


Finally, using an ORM makes writing unit tests for our application code much easier. Because we are using plain old objects in our business logic and accessing fields through simple attributes of the objects, we have the option of substituting in other objects in a test scenario, so long as our substitute objects fullfill the same public interface. This is practise is called **Mocking** and the objects are called **Mock object**.  Our application code can include functions and methods that receive objects as paramaters, working with and on those objects, but ignorant of how the objects themselves work.  For example, this method transfers pets from one person
to another:
   
    def transfer_pets(person_from, person_to):
    "transfer pets, but only for allowed species"
    for pet in person_from.pets:
        if pet.breed.species in person_to.allowed_species:
            person_from.pets.remove(pet)
            person_to.pets.append(pet)
    # the call to session.commit happen elsewhere

In the above method, there is no coupling of the function to *how* we store a 
pet-person relationship, we just know that it is *accessed* through a list at Person.pets. For that matter, the function doesn't even know that these are database backed objects, it just knows that we can get pet objects from person.pet. Thus if we want to unit test this method without having to connect to a database during the tests, we can write tests that call the function with Mock objects, so long as the Mock Objects fullfill how we expect to work with them. This means the tests run faster and require less database related setup and tear down. If we were using raw SQL queries in our method, this would not be possible. On very large projects with hundreds of tests, this can be a very significant speed up.

Hopefully by now you can see that for a project of any complexity, using a good ORM along with Python properties is a huge improvement over hand writing SQL. Of course, this begs the question, "How does updating an object magically make the SQL happen?"

In the examples above, we are only showing code that is *using* the ORM, but have skipped the code that *sets up* our ORM and our SQLAlchemy **domain model**, the collection of classes modelling the objects stored in our database. We need a certain amount of housekeeping code to setup a domain model such that SQLAlchemy knows what to do when we update our objects, and we need some housekeeping that makes SQLAlchemy talk to the database, initializing the engine and connections, etc. Compared to our simple psycopg2 examples in the last lesson, this *boilerplate*, as programmers call it, is a fair bit of extra code. 

However, we create the boilerplate only once, no matter how complex our application gets, and every *use* of the objects is simpler to read and maintain, more flexible, and less error prone. For a very simple database script that only selects a few records and updates them, the overhead of setting up an SQLAlchemy domain model and initializing the engine may not be worthwhile. For a larger project however, this becomes a very powerful use of the Don't-Repeat-Yourself principle: we only concern ourselves with *how* we map to SQL once, and after that we can work very easily with plain old objects.

## Comprehension Check

1.  a
2.  b
3.  c
4.  d
5.  e
6. ...



