<!-- 
name: PostgreSQL Setup
author: Benjamin White
type: content
time: 60 minutes
 -->

In this assignment, we'll point you in the right direction getting PostgreSQL up and running in your development environment. This will be the RDBMS that we will use in the remainder of this course, as we move on to building web apps and deploying to Heroku. 

Configuring a database is not always fun, and if you get stuck, be sure to reach out to the community and your mentor.

# Mac Users

You may already have PostgreSQL installed by default, but it probably won't be the most recent version, and to ensure students and mentors have a uniform, predictable experience, we're going to ask you to go through the following setup.

The easiest solution for getting PostgreSQL up and running on a Mac is [Postgres.app](http://postgresapp.com/). Go to that link and download the app. Once it has unzipped, you'll need to move it into your Applications folder. Then, all you have to do to launch Postgres is double click on the application icon (which will cause an elephant icon to appear in the toolbar at the top right of your screen). When you open Postgres.app, your database server will automatically start. 

To stop the server, select "Quit" from the elephant menu. Although you can launch Postgres using the elephant icon, there will be plenty of occassions where you want to activate it from the command line. To enable this, you need to add Postgres.app to your PATH. You can do this by adding the following line to your the top of your ~/.bash_profile file: `export PATH="/Applications/Postgres93.app/Contents/MacOS/bin:$PATH"` (double check the exact path and name, as it may have shifted since time of writing). After you've modified your path, you'll need to re-initiate your environment variables with source `~/.bash_profile`. Then, type `which psql`. If everything has gone correctly, you should see the path you just added.

Now that you've modified your path, you can open the psql console from the command line. You can see that this works by first running createdb test then running `psql -d test`. The "-d" flag here is where you specify the database you'd like to connect to, in this case, "test". Once you're inside the psql console, you can run `\dt` to describe the tables in your database. Since we haven't created any, you'll see "No relations found". You can quit out of the psql console by entering `\q`.

# Windows 



# Nitrous.io 

