[//]: <> (name: Sending Data to an API with POST )
[//]: <> (author: Joe Turner)
[//]: <> (type: code along)
[//]: <> (time: 120)

# Sending Data to an API

In the previous two assignments we've seen how to create an API for the retrieval of posts.  While that is looking great, it's not particularly useful until we can add posts using our API.  In this assignment we will be looking at how to send POST requests to an endpoint to add some posts.

## Test first

To get started, let's write a quick test for adding a post.  To add the post we are going to make a POST request to /api/posts.  The request will contains the title and body of our post as JSON.  Notice how we use the same endpoint as for getting a list of posts; the only difference is that we are sending a POST rather than a GET request.

Our test needs to check that:

- The request to our endpoint is succesful
- The post is getting added to the database as expected
- The endpoint is returning the correct JSON
- The endpoint is setting the correct Location header (more on this later)

So, let's add the following test to the `TestAPI` class in *tests/api_tests.py*.

```python
    def testPostPost(self):
        """ Posting a new post """
        data = {
            "title": "Example Post",
            "body": "Just a test"
        }

        response = self.client.post("/api/posts",
            data=json.dumps(data),
            content_type="application/json",
            headers=[("Accept", "application/json")]
        )

        self.assertEqual(response.status_code, 201)
        self.assertEqual(response.mimetype, "application/json")
        self.assertEqual(urlparse(response.headers.get("Location")).path,
                         "/api/posts/1")

        data = json.loads(response.data)
        self.assertEqual(data["id"], 1)
        self.assertEqual(data["title"], "Example Post")
        self.assertEqual(data["body"], "Just a test")

        posts = session.query(models.Post).all()
        self.assertEqual(len(posts), 1)

        post = posts[0]
        self.assertEqual(post.title, "Example Post")
        self.assertEqual(post.body, "Just a test")
```

While quite a lot of this is similar to the tests for the GET endpoints, there are a few new things to notice here.

When we make the post request we provide two new pieces of information:

- data: a JSON serialized representation of the post.
- content_type: a string escribing the content type of our request.

The response that we expect from the server is also more complex.  Our first check on the response make sure that we get a `201 Created` status.  This status is used to tell us that the post has been created sucessfully.

Our next check  makes sure that a Location header has been set, and points to the endpoint which we can use to retrieve the new post.  The Location header is used to point the client towards the location of the new resource.  In order to access the header we use the `response.headers.get` method.  We then use Python's urlparse module to remove the server address from the Location header.  This allows us to compare the returned location with our expected endpoint address.

The final checks on the response make sure that it contains JSON holding the correct representation of the post.

To make sure that the item was added to the database correctly we perform a simple query on the database.  We then check that the details stored match up with what was in our input.

Try running the test using `nosetests tests`.  It should fail at the first assertion, as we haven't added the endpoint yet.

## Making it work

With our test in place it's time to write the endpoint in *posts/api.py*.

```python
@app.route("/api/posts", methods=["POST"])
@decorators.accept_json
def posts_post():
    """ Add a new post """
    data = request.json

    # Add the post to the database
    post = models.Post(title=data["title"], body=data["body"])
    session.add(post)
    session.commit()

    # Return a 201 Created, containing the post as JSON and with the
    # Location header set to the location of the post
    data = json.dumps(post.asDictionary())
    headers = {"Location": url_for("post_get", id=post.id)}
    return Response(data, 201, headers=headers,
                    mimetype="application/json")
```

We access the data which we passed in using the `request.json` dictionary.  This is then used to create a new `Post` instance, which is added to the database.  We then create and return the response as usual, this time adding in a headers dictionary containing our Location header.  In order to find the correct location we use Flask's `url_for` function, which determines the URL for a specific endpoint.

Try running the tests again.  If everything is working correctly we should now be able to both add and retrieve post using our API.

## Good behaviour Pt 1. - Mimetypes

In a similar way to with our GET endpoints, there are a couple of additional things we can do to make our POST endpoint better behaved for clients.

Currently we use the `accept_json` decorator to ensure that the client can deal with the JSON that we return.  But what if a client tries to send us data that we don't understand?  At the moment our code will fail, so let's try to rectify that.

First let's write a test which tries to send data of an incorrect type to our endpoint:

```python
    def testUnsupportedMimetype(self):
        data = "<xml></xml>"
        response = self.client.post("/api/posts",
            data=json.dumps(data),
            content_type="application/xml",
            headers=[("Accept", "application/json")]
        )

        self.assertEqual(response.status_code, 415)
        self.assertEqual(response.mimetype, "application/json")

        data = json.loads(response.data)
        self.assertEqual(data["message"], "Request must contain JSON")
```

When we send the XML data we expect to see a `415 Unsupported Media Type` error, which tells the client that the data was in the wrong format.  We also check that we receive a JSON error message in the usual format.

Try running the test.  It should cause an error to be thrown when the endpoint tries to access the non-existant JSON data.  So let's try to write a decorator to fix that.  It will check whether the mimetype is set to `application/json`, and if not it will return our error.

```python
def require_json(func):
    """
    Decorator which returns a 415 Unsupported Media Type if the client sends
    something other than JSON
    """
    @wraps(func)
    def wrapper(*args, **kwargs):
        if (request.mimetype ==  "application/json"):
            return func(*args, **kwargs)
        data = json.dumps({"message": "Request must contain JSON"})
        return Response(data, 415, mimetype="application/json")
    return wrapper
```

This should look pretty familiar; it is almost exactly the same as our `accept_json` decorator, with a slightly different condition.

Try using this to decorate the `post_post` endpoint and then run the tests again.  We should now be dealing with incorrect input formats in a well behaved way.

## Good behaviour Pt 2. - Validation

We have seen how to handle clients sending the wrong type of data, but what if the data they are sending is valid JSON, but is in the wrong format.  For example, what if rather than a string for the title the client is giving us a list?

In order to handle these conditions more gracefully we need to validate the data that the client sends us.  Fortunately there is an excellent module for validating JSON data called *jsonschema*.  So let's see how it works.

First we will write a couple of tests, checking that our endpoint returns an error if the client sends us invalid data, or data which is missing important information.

```python
    def testInvalidData(self):
        """ Posting a post with an invalid body """
        data = {
            "title": "Example Post",
            "body": 32
        }

        response = self.client.post("/api/posts",
            data=json.dumps(data),
            content_type="application/json",
            headers=[("Accept", "application/json")]
        )

        self.assertEqual(response.status_code, 422)

        data = json.loads(response.data)
        self.assertEqual(data["message"], "32 is not of type 'string'")

    def testMissingData(self):
        """ Posting a post with a missing body """
        data = {
            "title": "Example Post",
        }

        response = self.client.post("/api/posts",
            data=json.dumps(data),
            content_type="application/json",
            headers=[("Accept", "application/json")]
        )

        self.assertEqual(response.status_code, 422)

        data = json.loads(response.data)
        self.assertEqual(data["message"], "'body' is a required property")
```

The tests check that the endpoint returns an error message, and a `422 Unprocessable Entity` status.  This tells the client that we couldn't correctly process the data they have given us.

Now let's use jsonschema to check the data that we are given, and make sure it complies to the format we are looking for.  The jsonschema library needs a complete description of object we expect to check whether the data is complies to that format.  The description (known as the schema) is described using a Python dictionary.  Try adding the following schema describing our post format to the top of the *posts/api.py* file:

```python
# JSON Schema describing the structure of a post
post_schema = {
    "properties": {
        "title" : {"type" : "string"},
        "body": {"type": "string"}
    },
    "required": ["title", "body"]
}
```

In our schema we say that we expect an object containing two properties: a string containing the title, and a string containing the body.  We specify that both items are required for the JSON to be valid.

Next we can alter our `post_post` endpoint to validate the input data against our schema:

```python
@app.route("/api/posts", methods=["POST"])
@decorators.accept_json
@decorators.require_json
def posts_post():
    """ Add a new post """
    data = request.json

    # Check that the JSON supplied is valid
    # If not we return a 422 Unprocessable Entity
    try:
        validate(data, post_schema)
    except ValidationError as error:
        data = {"message": error.message}
        return Response(json.dumps(data), 422, mimetype="application/json")

    # Add the post to the database
    post = models.Post(title=data["title"], body=data["body"])
    session.add(post)
    session.commit()

    # Return a 201 Created, containing the post as JSON and with the
    # Location header set to the location of the post
    data = json.dumps(post.asDictionary())
    headers = {"Location": url_for("post_get", id=post.id)}
    return Response(data, 201, headers=headers,
                    mimetype="application/json")
```

We try to validate the data against our post schema.  If this throws a `ValidationError` then we create the error message and return it with a `422` status.  Otherwise we carry on as usual and add the post.

Try to run your tests again.  You should see that we now give descriptive error messages if the wrong types of data are sent to our API.

With that in place we now have a complete, well behaved API allowing us to add and retrieve posts.  Next we will be using the knowledge that we've gained in this lesson to create some real single-page applications by building out an API.

## Extension task

Try adding a new endpoint which receives a PUT request to /api/post/<id>.  This endpoint should accept JSON in the same format as our POST method, and use it to edit the title and body of the specified post.

- Write test for POST request to /posts
- Write endpoint adding post
- Write test for wrong mimetype
- Add mimetype check decorator to endpoint
- Write test for invalid data
- Use jsonschema to validate data
- **EXTENSION** Add PUT endpoint for editing posts
